README.md, before:

# Cesium-Martini

**On-the-fly meshing of raster elevation tiles for the CesiumJS virtual globe**

![Himalayas](/img/himalayas.jpg)

This package contains a Cesium
[TerrainProvider](https://cesium.com/docs/cesiumjs-ref-doc/TerrainProvider.html)
that uses right-triangular irregular networks (RTIN) pioneered by
[Mapbox's Martini](https://observablehq.com/@mourner/martin-real-time-rtin-terrain-mesh) to
transform [Terrain-RGB elevation tiles](https://blog.mapbox.com/global-elevation-data-6689f1d0ba65) into
[quantized mesh terrain](https://github.com/CesiumGS/quantized-mesh),
for rendering in the [CesiumJS digital globe](https://cesium.com).
The module provides a general technique applicable to all raster imagery
(although the Terrain-RGB format is near-ideal for streaming elevation data).
Fixes for performance and better control of rendering quality are in progress.

This module was created to support our geologic map visualization work
at [Macrostrat](https://macrostrat.org) and as a building block
for future rich geoscience visualizations.


## Installation

This package is listed on NPM as `@macrostrat/cesium-martini`. It can be installed
using the command

```
npm install --save @macrostrat/cesium-martini
```

![Cesium-Martini](/img/cesium-martini.png)

## Development

As of version `1.3.x`, `cesium-martini` development is tested with the Yarn package manager.
Your mileage with `npm` may vary.

### Quick start

1. Clone the repository
2. Run `git submodule update --init` to fetch the [martini](https://github.com/mapbox/martini) submodule
2. Install dependencies with `yarn install`
3. Build the package with `yarn run build`

After cloning this repository, you can build the module (using Rollup) with
`yarn run build`, or build and watch for changes with `yarn run watch`.

### Example applications

Several example applications are available in the [`examples/`](examples/) directory and runnable from the root project.
The main example is built with Vite and others are built with Webpack v5. As well as showing how to use this module, these examples contain configuration for bundling Cesium in each packaging environment.

To run an example application, add `MAPBOX_API_TOKEN=<your-mapbox-token>` to a `.env` file.
in the root of this repository, and then start the appropriate example:

- `yarn run example` (Vite)
- `yarn run example:webpack` (Webpack)
- `yarn run example:webpack-react` (Webpack + React)

Contributions in the form of bug reports and pull requests are welcome.
These can be to add functionality (e.g. optional normal-map generation) or for
performance. See list of [known limitations](#current-known-limitations) below.

## Motivation

The Cesium digital globe is a powerful platform for visualization of geospatial
data in 3D. Cesium maintains a global elevation dataset as a prebuilt terrain mesh,
which caches the computationally-intensive step of meshing height-field data
into a triangle irregular network (TIN). Unfortunately, this
[quantized mesh](https://github.com/CesiumGS/quantized-mesh) format is relatively
new, narrowly supported and tailored to Cesium itself. Going forward, supporting
a TIN format for elevation datasets requires maintenance of significant single-purpose
processing pipelines and storage resources.

Mapbox maintains a multiscale global elevation dataset in their clever
[terrain-RGB](https://blog.mapbox.com/global-elevation-data-6689f1d0ba65)
format, which bridges web standard file formats (PNG images) with traditional raster GIS
formats for representing terrain. Rasters are the standard representation of elevation data across the
geosciences, and many pipelines are available to create and modify raster images.
Basically any elevation dataset can be easily rescaled to the Terrain-RGB
format, but the jump from there to a "Quantized mesh" is more complicated.

Recently, the [MARTINI](https://github.com/mapbox/martini) project by
[Vladimir Agafonkin](https://agafonkin.com/) at Mapbox demonstrated an
[elegant algorithmic approach](https://observablehq.com/@mourner/martin-real-time-rtin-terrain-mesh)
that sidesteps this issue.
MARTINI meshes based on right-triangulated irregular networks (RTIN, _Evans et al., 1998_)
and is far quicker than the traditional TIN generation techniques.

A speedy meshing algorithm allows this data-preparation step to be handled
in the browser after elevation tiles are loaded. Integrating this
toolchain into the Cesium digital globe enables the usage of Mapbox global
data and other raster terrain layers (e.g. planetary and bathymetric data!),
without adding overhead of TIN processing and storage.

## Current limitations

### Lack of support for overzooming

Cesium's implementations of the `TerrainProvider` interface are generally geared
towards representing static terrain meshes. The RTIN algorithm used here can
dynamically build meshes at a variety of error levels, and the input height
field are data-dense and can represent extremely detailed meshes at a given zoom level. Currently,
meshes are generated at levels of detail that undersample the available structure
in a terrain tile — levels of detail are calibrated to what Cesium needs to
render visually pleasing output at a given zoom level.

A smarter and more parsimonious solution would use much lower zoom levels
for terrain than imagery, using the full resolution of the dataset in
mesh construction. Done correctly, this could lead to an extremely
data-efficient and adaptive terrain render, but this seems to run somewhat
counter to how Cesium internally manages levels of detail. Ideally, someone familiar with the inner workings
of Cesium would provide some guidance here.

### Outstanding bugs and issues

- [x] High-resolution `@2x` tiles are notionally supported but not well-tested.
- [ ] There is no formal testing framework to catch regressions.
- [ ] TypeScript types are discarded on compilation rather than checked properly.

## Prior art and relevant examples

- [Mapbox MARTINI](https://github.com/mapbox/martini)
- [MARTINI algorithm explanation](https://observablehq.com/@mourner/martin-real-time-rtin-terrain-mesh)
- [Evans et al., _Right-triangulated irregular networks_, 1998](https://www.cs.ubc.ca/~will/papers/rtin.pdf)
  ([journal link](https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s00453-001-0006-x))
- [Cesium quantized mesh specification](https://github.com/CesiumGS/quantized-mesh)
- [Quantized mesh viewer](https://github.com/heremaps/quantized-mesh-viewer)
- [Cesium globe materials example](https://sandcastle.cesium.com/?src=Globe%20Materials.html)
- [Cesium sky/atmosphere example](https://sandcastle.cesium.com/?src=Sky%20Atmosphere.html)

## TODO

- Make compatible with Mapbox's new `terrain-dem` tileset if possible
- Better masking of unavailable tiles
- Bathymetry option
- Tie to hillshade generator so the same tiles are loaded

Pull requests for any and all of these priorities are appreciated!

## Changelog

### `[1.3.0]`: September 2023

- Add compilation to ESModules, which allows the package to be used with modern bundlers like [**Vite**](https://vitejs.dev). *Contributed by [@fc](https://github.com/fc).*
- Change latitude-based scaling factor for tile error to improve fidelity at high latitudes.
- Remove `regenerator-runtime` from web-worker code, targeting modern platforms.

#### Development environment

We reorganized the development environment and examples through a set of interrelated changes, for a more modern overall design.

- Switched to `yarn` from `npm` as the default package manager
- Enabled Yarn Plug'n'Play for faster development
- Created a Vite example application
- Migrated Webpack examples to Webpack 5
- Moved all examples to the `examples/` directory as Yarn workspaces, enabling
  separation of dependencies


### `[1.2.0]`: November 2021

- Globe caps! (disable using the `fillPoles` option).
- Some fixes for efficiency
- Fixed small errors in tile occlusion code
- Added a `minZoom` configuration option to prevent excessive loading of low-resolution tiles
- Four (!) pull requests from [@stuarta0](https://github.com/stuarta0) to improve loading of non-Mapbox tilesets


### `[1.1.3]`: June 2021

- Fix memory leak where `ArrayBuffer`s were retained due to console logging.

### `[1.1.2]`: May 2021

- Fixed a bug with loading high-resolution tiles
- Added a `skipOddLevels` option that significantly reduces the load of zooming through many terrain levels.
  This is enabled by default.
- Greatly increase skirt height

### `[1.1.0]`: May 2021

- Fixed a bug with tile occlusion south of the equator for high-detail tiles
- A quicker and more robust mesh-densification algorithm for low zoom levels
- More configurability with options like `detailScalar` and `minimumErrorLevel`.
- Updated README and examples
- Uses web workers for rapid tile generation off the main thread

Commit message:

Upgrade axios and bump package version

README.md, after:

# Cesium-Martini

**On-the-fly meshing of raster elevation tiles for the CesiumJS virtual globe**

![Himalayas](/img/himalayas.jpg)

This package contains a Cesium
[TerrainProvider](https://cesium.com/docs/cesiumjs-ref-doc/TerrainProvider.html)
that uses right-triangular irregular networks (RTIN) pioneered by
[Mapbox's Martini](https://observablehq.com/@mourner/martin-real-time-rtin-terrain-mesh) to
transform [Terrain-RGB elevation tiles](https://blog.mapbox.com/global-elevation-data-6689f1d0ba65) into
[quantized mesh terrain](https://github.com/CesiumGS/quantized-mesh),
for rendering in the [CesiumJS digital globe](https://cesium.com).
The module provides a general technique applicable to all raster imagery
(although the Terrain-RGB format is near-ideal for streaming elevation data).
Fixes for performance and better control of rendering quality are in progress.

This module was created to support our geologic map visualization work
at [Macrostrat](https://macrostrat.org) and as a building block
for future rich geoscience visualizations.


## Installation

This package is listed on NPM as `@macrostrat/cesium-martini`. It can be installed
using the command

```
npm install --save @macrostrat/cesium-martini
```

![Cesium-Martini](/img/cesium-martini.png)

## Development

As of version `1.3.x`, `cesium-martini` development is tested with the Yarn package manager.
Your mileage with `npm` may vary.

### Quick start

1. Clone the repository
2. Install dependencies with `yarn install`
3. Build the package with `yarn run build`

After cloning this repository, you can build the module (using Rollup) with
`yarn run build`, or build and watch for changes with `yarn run watch`.

### Example applications

Several example applications are available in the [`examples/`](examples/) directory and runnable from the root project.
The main example is built with Vite and others are built with Webpack v5. As well as showing how to use this module,
these examples contain configuration for bundling Cesium in each packaging system.

To run an example application, add `MAPBOX_API_TOKEN=<your-mapbox-token>` to a `.env` file.
in the root of this repository, and then start the appropriate example:

- `yarn run example` (Vite)
- `yarn run example:mapzen` (Vite + Mapzen)
- `yarn run example:webpack` (Webpack)
- `yarn run example:webpack-mapzen` (Webpack + Mapzen)
- `yarn run example:webpack-react` (Webpack + React)

Contributions in the form of bug reports and pull requests are welcome.
These can be to add functionality (e.g. optional normal-map generation) or for
performance. See list of [known limitations](#current-known-limitations) below.

## Motivation

The Cesium digital globe is a powerful platform for visualization of geospatial
data in 3D. Cesium maintains a global elevation dataset as a prebuilt terrain mesh,
which caches the computationally-intensive step of meshing height-field data
into a triangle irregular network (TIN). Unfortunately, this
[quantized mesh](https://github.com/CesiumGS/quantized-mesh) format is relatively
new, narrowly supported and tailored to Cesium itself. Going forward, supporting
a TIN format for elevation datasets requires maintenance of significant single-purpose
processing pipelines and storage resources.

Mapbox maintains a multiscale global elevation dataset in their clever
[terrain-RGB](https://blog.mapbox.com/global-elevation-data-6689f1d0ba65)
format, which bridges web standard file formats (PNG images) with traditional raster GIS
formats for representing terrain. Rasters are the standard representation of elevation data across the
geosciences, and many pipelines are available to create and modify raster images.
Basically any elevation dataset can be easily rescaled to the Terrain-RGB
format, but the jump from there to a "Quantized mesh" is more complicated.

Recently, the [MARTINI](https://github.com/mapbox/martini) project by
[Vladimir Agafonkin](https://agafonkin.com/) at Mapbox demonstrated an
[elegant algorithmic approach](https://observablehq.com/@mourner/martin-real-time-rtin-terrain-mesh)
that sidesteps this issue.
MARTINI meshes based on right-triangulated irregular networks (RTIN, _Evans et al., 1998_)
and is far quicker than the traditional TIN generation techniques.

A speedy meshing algorithm allows this data-preparation step to be handled
in the browser after elevation tiles are loaded. Integrating this
toolchain into the Cesium digital globe enables the usage of Mapbox global
data and other raster terrain layers (e.g. planetary and bathymetric data!),
without adding overhead of TIN processing and storage.

## Current limitations

### Lack of support for overzooming

Cesium's implementations of the `TerrainProvider` interface are generally geared
towards representing static terrain meshes. The RTIN algorithm used here can
dynamically build meshes at a variety of error levels, and the input height
field are data-dense and can represent extremely detailed meshes at a given zoom level. Currently,
meshes are generated at levels of detail that undersample the available structure
in a terrain tile — levels of detail are calibrated to what Cesium needs to
render visually pleasing output at a given zoom level.

A smarter and more parsimonious solution would use much lower zoom levels
for terrain than imagery, using the full resolution of the dataset in
mesh construction. Done correctly, this could lead to an extremely
data-efficient and adaptive terrain render, but this seems to run somewhat
counter to how Cesium internally manages levels of detail. Ideally, someone familiar with the inner workings
of Cesium would provide some guidance here.

### Outstanding bugs and issues

- [x] High-resolution `@2x` tiles are notionally supported but not well-tested.
- [ ] There is no formal testing framework to catch regressions.
- [ ] TypeScript types are discarded on compilation rather than checked properly.

## Prior art and relevant examples

- [Mapbox MARTINI](https://github.com/mapbox/martini)
- [MARTINI algorithm explanation](https://observablehq.com/@mourner/martin-real-time-rtin-terrain-mesh)
- [Evans et al., _Right-triangulated irregular networks_, 1998](https://www.cs.ubc.ca/~will/papers/rtin.pdf)
  ([journal link](https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s00453-001-0006-x))
- [Cesium quantized mesh specification](https://github.com/CesiumGS/quantized-mesh)
- [Quantized mesh viewer](https://github.com/heremaps/quantized-mesh-viewer)
- [Cesium globe materials example](https://sandcastle.cesium.com/?src=Globe%20Materials.html)
- [Cesium sky/atmosphere example](https://sandcastle.cesium.com/?src=Sky%20Atmosphere.html)

## TODO

- Make compatible with Mapbox's new `terrain-dem` tileset if possible
- Better masking of unavailable tiles
- Bathymetry option
- Tie to hillshade generator so the same tiles are loaded

Pull requests for any and all of these priorities are appreciated!

## Changelog

### `[1.4.0]`: February 2025

- Merge [**PR #10**](https://github.com/davenquinn/cesium-martini/pull/10) from [*Stuart Attenborrow*](https://github.com/stuarta0) to allow loading of non-Mapbox terrain tiles
- Created Vite and Webpack examples of using the module with Mapzen Terrarium tiles
- Migrated Vite examples to Vite 5
- Upgraded `axios` dependency
- Remove submodule dependency for `@mapbox/martini` in favor of directly importing from [my fork](https://github.com/davenquinn/martini)

### `[1.3.0]`: September 2023

- Add compilation to ESModules, which allows the package to be used with modern bundlers like [**Vite**](https://vitejs.dev). *Contributed by [@fc](https://github.com/fc).*
- Change latitude-based scaling factor for tile error to improve fidelity at high latitudes.
- Remove `regenerator-runtime` from web-worker code, targeting modern platforms.

#### Development environment

We reorganized the development environment and examples through a set of interrelated changes, for a more modern overall design.

- Switched to `yarn` from `npm` as the default package manager
- Enabled Yarn Plug'n'Play for faster development
- Created a Vite example application
- Migrated Webpack examples to Webpack 5
- Moved all examples to the `examples/` directory as Yarn workspaces, enabling
  separation of dependencies


### `[1.2.0]`: November 2021

- Globe caps! (disable using the `fillPoles` option).
- Some fixes for efficiency
- Fixed small errors in tile occlusion code
- Added a `minZoom` configuration option to prevent excessive loading of low-resolution tiles
- Four (!) pull requests from [@stuarta0](https://github.com/stuarta0) to improve loading of non-Mapbox tilesets


### `[1.1.3]`: June 2021

- Fix memory leak where `ArrayBuffer`s were retained due to console logging.

### `[1.1.2]`: May 2021

- Fixed a bug with loading high-resolution tiles
- Added a `skipOddLevels` option that significantly reduces the load of zooming through many terrain levels.
  This is enabled by default.
- Greatly increase skirt height

### `[1.1.0]`: May 2021

- Fixed a bug with tile occlusion south of the equator for high-detail tiles
- A quicker and more robust mesh-densification algorithm for low zoom levels
- More configurability with options like `detailScalar` and `minimumErrorLevel`.
- Updated README and examples
- Uses web workers for rapid tile generation off the main thread
